and I moved to Harare in 1985 social
justice was at the core of Zimbabwe's
national health policy the new
government emerged from a long war of
independence and immediately proclaimed
a socialist agenda healthcare services
primary education became essentially
free a massive expansion of rural health
centers place roughly 80% of the
population less than a two-hour walk
from these facilities a truly remarkable
accomplishment in 1980 the year of
independence 25 percent of Zimbabwe and
children were fully immunized by 1990 a
mere decade later this proportion stood
at 80 percent
I felt tremendously privileged to be
part of this transformation of
revolution the excitement that comradery
was palpable working side-by-side with
brilliant Zimbabweans scientists doctors
activists I felt connected not only to
an African independence movement but to
a global progressive public health
movement but there were daunting
challenges Zimbabwe reported its first
aids case in 1985 the year I arrived I
had taken care of a few patients with
AIDS in the early 1980s when I did my
medical training at Harlem Hospital but
we had no idea what lay in store for
Africa infection rate stood at about two
percent in my early days there these
would soar to one out of every four
adults by the time I left Harare 17
years later by the mid-1990s
I told hundreds of people in the prime
of life that they were HIV positive I
saw colleagues and friends die
my students hospital patients died in
response my colleagues and I set up a
clinic we did condom demonstrations we
launched school education and workplace
interventions we did research we
counseled the partners of infected men
about how to protect themselves we
worked hard and at the time I believed
that I was doing my best I was providing
excellent treatment such as it was but I
was not talking about structural change
former UN Secretary Kofi Annan has
spoken candidly about his personal
failure leading to the Rwandan genocide
in 1994 he was head of the UN
peacekeeping Department at a 10-year
memorial for the genocide he reflected I
believed at the time I was doing my best
but I realized after the genocide that
there was more I could and should have
done to sound the alarm and rally
support the AIDS epidemic caught the
health community unprepared and today
when the World Health Organization
estimates that 39 million people have
lost their lives to this disease I'm not
alone in feeling remorse and regret it
not having done more earlier but while
living in Zimbabwe I didn't see my role
as an advocacy or a political one I was
there for my technical skills both my
clinical and my research epidemiology
skills and in my mind my job was to take
care of patients and to do research to
better understand the population
patterns of transmission and I hoped at
least slow the spread of the virus I was
aware that socially marginalized
population were a disproportionate risk
of getting and dying of AIDS and on the
sugar plantations which really more
closely resembled fuel systems than any
modern and too
60% of pregnant women tested HIV
positive I work to show how getting
infected was not a moral failure but
instead related to a culture of male
superiority to force migrant labor and
to colonialism White's were largely
unscathed as health professionals our
tools were pitifully weak imploring
people to change their individual
behaviors use condom reduce numbers of
partners infection rates climbed and
when treatment became available in the
West treatment that remains our most
potent weapon against this virus it was
unaffordable to the public sector across
Africa it didn't speak out about the
unequal access to these life-saving
drugs or about the underlying economic
and political systems that were driving
infections in rates and such huge swaths
of the population I rationalized my
silence by reminding myself that I was a
guest in the country that sounding the
alarm could even get me kicked out keep
me from doing good work taking care of
my patients doing much-needed research
so I didn't speak out about the
government's early stance on AIDS
I didn't voice my concerns loudly enough
many doctors health professionals may
think I did nothing wrong
our pact with our patients the
Hippocratic oaths and its variants is
about the sanctity of the patient-doctor
relationship and I did everything I
could for each and every patient of mine
but I knew that epidemics emerge along
the fissures of our society reflecting
not only biology but more importantly
patterns of marginalization exclusion
discrimination related to race gen
sexuality class and more it was true of
AIDS it was true just recently of Ebola
medical anthropologists such as Paul
Farmer who worked on AIDS in Haiti call
this structural violence structural
because inequities are embedded in the
political and economic organization of
our social world often in ways that are
invisible to those with privilege and
power and violence because its impact
premature deaths suffering illness is
violent we do little for our patients if
we fail to recognize these social
injustice is sounding the alarm is the
first step towards doing Public Health
right and it's how we may rally support
to break through and create real change
together so these days I'm not staying
quiet I'm speaking up about a lot of
things even when it makes listeners
uncomfortable even when it makes me
uncomfortable
and a lot of this is about racial
disparities and institutionalized racism
things that we're not supposed to have
in this country anymore certainly not in
the practice of medicine or Public
Health but we have them and we pay for
them
in lives cut short that's why sounding
the alarm about the impact of racism on
health in the United States the ongoing
institutional and interpersonal violence
that people of color face compounded by
our tragic legacy of 250 years of
slavery 90 years of Jim Crow and 60
years of imperfect equality sounding the
alarm about this is central to doing my
job right
as New York city's health commissioner
in New York City premature mortality
that's death before the age of 65 is 50%
higher for black men than white one so
black woman in 2012 faced more than ten
times the risk of dying related to
childbirth as a white woman and though
we've made enormous strides in reducing
infant mortality rates a black baby
still faces nearly three times the risk
of death in its first year of life as
compared to a white baby New York City
is not exceptional these statistics are
paralleled by statistics found across
the United States a recent New York
Times analysis reported that there are
1.5 million missing black men across the
country they noted that more than one
out of every six black men who today
should be between the ages of 25 and 54
years have disappeared from daily life
lost either to prison or premature
deaths there's great injustice in the
daily and disproportionate violence
faced by young black men the focus of
recent protests under the banner hashtag
black lives matter but we have to
remember that enduring and disparate
rates and the occurrence and outcome of
common medical conditions heart disease
cancer diabetes HIV diseases that may
kill slowly and quietly and take even
more black lives prematurely as the
hashtag black lives matter movement
unfolded I felt frustrated and angry
that the medical community has been
reluctant to even use the word racism in
our research and our work you've
probably felt something every time I've
said it
our medical students held iins and their
white coats but the medical community
has largely stood by passively as
ongoing discrimination continues to
effect the disease profile and mortality
and I worry that the trend towards
personalized and precision medicine
looking for biological or genetic
targets to better tailor treatment may
inadvertently cause us to lose sight of
the big picture than it is the daily
context where a person lives grows works
loves that most importantly determines
population health and for too many of us
poor health as health professionals in
our daily work whether in the clinic or
doing research we are witness to great
injustice the homeless person who is
unable to follow medical advice because
he has more pressing priorities the
transgender youth who is contemplating
suicide because our society is just so
harsh the single mother who has been
made to feel that she's responsible for
the poor health of her child our role as
health professionals is not just to
treat our patients but to sound the
alarm
and advocate for change rightfully or
not our societal position gives our
voices great credibility and we
shouldn't waste that I regret not
speaking up in Zimbabwe and I've
promised myself that as new york city's
health commissioner I will use every
opportunity I have to sound the alarm
and rally support for health equity I
will speak out against racism and I hope
you will join me and I'll join you when
you speak out against sexism or any
other form of inequality it's time for
us
to rise up and collectively speak up
about structural inequality we don't
have to have all the answers to call for
change
we just need courage the health of our
patients the health of us all depends on
it
[Applause]